<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Monday</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Monday</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
					<p>
						<span>I thynke for to touche also</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The worlde whiche neweth everie daie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So as I can, so as I maie.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>―John Gower</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
					<p>
						<span>The hye sheryfe of Notynghame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hym holde in your mynd.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Robin Hood Ballads</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
					<p>
						<span>His shoote it was but loosely shott,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet flewe not the arrowe in vaine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it mett one of the sheriffe’s men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And William a Trent was slaine.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Robin Hood Ballads</cite>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Gazed on the heavens for what he missed on Earth.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Britania’s Pastorals</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>When the first light dawned on the earth and the birds awoke, and the brave river was heard rippling confidently seaward, and the nimble early rising wind rustled the oak leaves about our tent, all men, having reinforced their bodies and their souls with sleep, and cast aside doubt and fear, were invited to unattempted adventures.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="enm">
				<p>
					<span>All courageous knichtis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Agains the day dichtis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breest-plate that bricht is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feght with their foue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stoned steed stampis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw curage and crampis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Syne on the land lampis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night is neir gone.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">One of us took the boat over to the opposite shore, which was flat and accessible, a quarter of a mile distant, to empty it of water and wash out the clay, while the other kindled a fire and got breakfast ready. At an early hour we were again on our way, rowing through the fog as before, the river already awake, and a million crisped waves come forth to meet the sun when he should show himself. The countrymen, recruited by their day of rest, were already stirring, and had begun to cross the ferry on the business of the week. This ferry was as busy as a beaver dam, and all the world seemed anxious to get across the Merrimack River at this particular point, waiting to get set over⁠—children with their two cents done up in paper, jailbirds broke loose and constable with warrant, travellers from distant lands to distant lands, men and women to whom the Merrimack River was a bar. There stands a gig in the gray morning, in the mist, the impatient traveller pacing the wet shore with whip in hand, and shouting through the fog after the regardless Charon and his retreating ark, as if he might throw that passenger overboard and return forthwith for himself; he will compensate him. He is to break his fast at some unseen place on the opposite side. It may be Ledyard or the Wandering Jew. Whence, pray, did he come out of the foggy night? and whither through the sunny day will he go? We observe only his transit; important to us, forgotten by him, transiting all day. There are two of them. May be, they are Virgil and Dante. But when they crossed the Styx, none were seen bound up or down the stream, that I remember. It is only a <i xml:lang="la">transjectus</i>, a transitory voyage, like life itself, none but the long-lived gods bound up or down the stream. Many of these Monday men are ministers, no doubt, reseeking their parishes with hired horses, with sermons in their valises all read and gutted, the day after never with them. They cross each other’s routes all the country over like woof and warp, making a garment of loose texture; vacation now for six days. They stop to pick nuts and berries, and gather apples by the wayside at their leisure. Good religious men, with the love of men in their hearts, and the means to pay their toll in their pockets. We got over this ferry chain without scraping, rowing athwart the tide of travel⁠—no toll for us that day.</p>
			<p>The fog dispersed and we rowed leisurely along through Tyngsborough, with a clear sky and a mild atmosphere, leaving the habitations of men behind and penetrating yet farther into the territory of ancient Dunstable. It was from Dunstable, then a frontier town, that the famous Captain Lovewell, with his company, marched in quest of the Indians on the 18th of April, 1725. He was the son of “an ensign in the army of Oliver Cromwell, who came to this country, and settled at Dunstable, where he died at the great age of one hundred and twenty years.” In the words of the old nursery tale, sung about a hundred years ago⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>He and his valiant soldiers did range the woods full wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardships they endured to quell the Indian’s pride.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>In the shaggy pine forest of Pequawket they met the “rebel Indians,” and prevailed, after a bloody fight, and a remnant returned home to enjoy the fame of their victory. A township called Lovewell’s Town, but now for some reason, or perhaps without reason, Pembroke, was granted them by the State.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Of all our valiant English, there were but thirty-four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the rebel Indians, there were about fourscore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sixteen of our English did safely home return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest were killed and wounded, for which we all must mourn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our worthy <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Lovewell among them there did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They killed <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Robbins, and wounded good young Frye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was our English Chaplin; he many Indians slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some of them he scalped while bullets round him flew.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">Our brave forefathers have exterminated all the Indians, and their degenerate children no longer dwell in garrisoned houses nor hear any war-whoop in their path. It would be well, perchance, if many an “English Chaplin” in these days could exhibit as unquestionable trophies of his valor as did “good young Frye.” We have need to be as sturdy pioneers still as Miles Standish, or Church, or Lovewell. We are to follow on another trail, it is true, but one as convenient for ambushes. What if the Indians are exterminated, are not savages as grim prowling about the clearings today?⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>And braving many dangers and hardships in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They safe arrived at Dunstable the thirteenth (?)<!-- question mark in parentheses is in the original --> day of May.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">But they did not all “safe arrive in Dunstable the thirteenth,” or the fifteenth, or the thirtieth “day of May.” Eleazer Davis and Josiah Jones, both of Concord, for our native town had seven men in this fight, Lieutenant Farwell, of Dunstable, and Jonathan Frye, of Andover, who were all wounded, were left behind, creeping toward the settlements. “After travelling several miles, Frye was left and lost,” though a more recent poet has assigned him company in his last hours.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>A man he was of comely form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Polished and brave, well learned and kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Harvard’s learned halls he left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the wilds a grave to find.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! now his blood-red arm he lifts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His closing lids he tries to raise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak once more before he dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In supplication and in praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He prays kind Heaven to grant success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave Lovewell’s men to guide and bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they<!-- contraction split in original --> ’ve shed their heart-blood true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise them all to happiness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="elision">⋮</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lieutenant Farwell took his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arm around his neck he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Brave Chaplain, I could wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Heaven had made me die for you.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Farwell held out eleven days. “A tradition says,” as we learn from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Concord</i>, “that arriving at a pond with <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Farwell, Davis pulled off one of his moccasins, cut it in strings, on which he fastened a hook, caught some fish, fried and ate them. They refreshed him, but were injurious to Farwell, who died soon after.” Davis had a ball lodged in his body, and his right hand shot off; but on the whole, he seems to have been less damaged than his companion. He came into Berwick after being out fourteen days. Jones also had a ball lodged in his body, but he likewise got into Saco after fourteen days, though not in the best condition imaginable. “He had subsisted,” says an old journal, “on the spontaneous vegetables of the forest; and cranberries which he had eaten came out of wounds he had received in his body.” This was also the case with Davis. The last two reached home at length, safe if not sound, and lived many years in a crippled state to enjoy their pension.</p>
			<p>But alas! of the crippled Indians, and their adventures in the woods⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>For as we are informed, so thick and fast they fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce twenty of their number at night did get home well,</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>—how many balls lodged with them, how fared their cranberries, what Berwick or Saco they got into, and finally what pension or township was granted them, there is no journal to tell.</p>
			<p>It is stated in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Dunstable</i>, that just before his last march, Lovewell was warned to beware of the ambuscades of the enemy, but “he replied, ‘that he did not care for them,’ and bending down a small elm beside which he was standing into a bow, declared ‘that he would treat the Indians in the same way.’ This elm is still standing [in Nashua]<!-- Thoreau's brackets -->, a venerable and magnificent tree.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Meanwhile, having passed the Horseshoe Interval in Tyngsborough, where the river makes a sudden bend to the northwest⁠—for our reflections have anticipated our progress somewhat⁠—we were advancing farther into the country and into the day, which last proved almost as golden as the preceding, though the slight bustle and activity of the Monday seemed to penetrate even to this scenery. Now and then we had to muster all our energy to get round a point, where the river broke rippling over rocks, and the maples trailed their branches in the stream, but there was generally a backwater or eddy on the side, of which we took advantage. The river was here about forty rods wide and fifteen feet deep. Occasionally one ran along the shore, examining the country, and visiting the nearest farmhouses, while the other followed the windings of the stream alone, to meet his companion at some distant point, and hear the report of his adventures; how the farmer praised the coolness of his well, and his wife offered the stranger a draught of milk, or the children quarrelled for the only transparency in the window that they might get sight of the man at the well. For though the country seemed so new, and no house was observed by us, shut in between the banks that sunny day, we did not have to travel far to find where men inhabited, like wild bees, and had sunk wells in the loose sand and loam of the Merrimack. There dwelt the subject of the Hebrew scriptures, and the <i xml:lang="fr">Esprit des Lois</i>, where a thin vaporous smoke curled up through the noon. All that is told of mankind, of the inhabitants of the Upper Nile, and the Sunderbunds, and Timbuktu, and the Orinoco, was experience here. Every race and class of men was represented. According to Belknap, the historian of New Hampshire who wrote sixty years ago, here too, perchance, dwelt “new lights,” and free thinking men even then. “The people in general throughout the State,” it is written, “are professors of the Christian religion in some form or other. There is, however, a sort of <em>wise men</em> who pretend to reject it; but they have not yet been able to substitute a better in its place.”</p>
			<p>The other voyageur, perhaps, would in the meanwhile have seen a brown hawk, or a woodchuck, or a muskrat creeping under the alders.</p>
			<p>We occasionally rested in the shade of a maple or a willow, and drew forth a melon for our refreshment, while we contemplated at our leisure the lapse of the river and of human life; and as that current, with its floating twigs and leaves, so did all things pass in review before us, while far away in cities and marts on this very stream, the old routine was proceeding still. There is, indeed, a tide in the affairs of men, as the poet says, and yet as things flow they circulate, and the ebb always balances the flow. All streams are but tributary to the ocean, which itself does not stream, and the shores are unchanged, but in longer periods than man can measure. Go where we will, we discover infinite change in particulars only, not in generals. When I go into a museum and see the mummies wrapped in their linen bandages, I see that the lives of men began to need reform as long ago as when they walked the earth. I come out into the streets, and meet men who declare that the time is near at hand for the redemption of the race. But as men lived in Thebes, so do they live in Dunstable today. “Time drinketh up the essence of every great and noble action which ought to be performed, and is delayed in the execution.” So says Vishnu Sharma; and we perceive that the schemers return again and again to common sense and labor. Such is the evidence of history.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Yet I doubt not through the ages one increasing purpose runs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the thoughts of men are widened with the process of the Suns.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>There are secret articles in our treaties with the gods, of more importance than all the rest, which the historian can never know.</p>
			<p>There are many skillful apprentices, but few master workmen. On every hand we observe a truly wise practice, in education, in morals, and in the arts of life, the embodied wisdom of many an ancient philosopher. Who does not see that heresies have some time prevailed, that reforms have already taken place? All this worldly wisdom might be regarded as the once unamiable heresy of some wise man. Some interests have got a footing on the earth which we have not made sufficient allowance for. Even they who first built these barns and cleared the land thus, had some valor. The abrupt epochs and chasms are smoothed down in history as the inequalities of the plain are concealed by distance. But unless we do more than simply learn the trade of our time, we are but apprentices, and not yet masters of the art of life.</p>
			<p>Now that we are casting away these melon seeds, how can we help feeling reproach? He who eats the fruit, should at least plant the seed; aye, if possible, a better seed than that whose fruit he has enjoyed. Seeds! there are seeds enough which need only to be stirred in with the soil where they lie, by an inspired voice or pen, to bear fruit of a divine flavor. O thou spendthrift! Defray thy debt to the world; eat not the seed of institutions, as the luxurious do, but plant it rather, while thou devourest the pulp and tuber for thy subsistence; that so, perchance, one variety may at last be found worthy of preservation.</p>
			<p>There are moments when all anxiety and stated toil are becalmed in the infinite leisure and repose of nature. All laborers must have their nooning, and at this season of the day, we are all, more or less, Asiatics, and give over all work and reform. While lying thus on our oars by the side of the stream, in the heat of the day, our boat held by an osier put through the staple in its prow, and slicing the melons, which are a fruit of the East, our thoughts reverted to Arabia, Persia, and Hindustan, the lands of contemplation and dwelling-places of the ruminant nations. In the experience of this noontide we could find some apology even for the instinct of the opium, betel, and tobacco chewers. Mount Sabér, according to the French traveller and naturalist Botta, is celebrated for producing the Khat-tree, of which “the soft tops of the twigs and tender leaves are eaten,” says his reviewer, “and produce an agreeable soothing excitement, restoring from fatigue, banishing sleep, and disposing to the enjoyment of conversation.” We thought that we might lead a dignified Oriental life along this stream as well, and the maple and alders would be our Khat-trees.</p>
			<p>It is a great pleasure to escape sometimes from the restless class of Reformers. What if these grievances exist? So do you and I. Think you that sitting hens are troubled with ennui these long summer days, sitting on and on in the crevice of a hayloft, without active employment? By the faint cackling in distant barns, I judge that dame Nature is interested still to know how many eggs her hens lay. The Universal Soul, as it is called, has an interest in the stacking of hay, the foddering of cattle, and the draining of peat-meadows. Away in Scythia, away in India, it makes butter and cheese. Suppose that all farms <em>are</em> run out, and we youths must buy old land and bring it to, still everywhere the relentless opponents of reform bear a strange resemblance to ourselves; or, perchance, they are a few old maids and bachelors, who sit round the kitchen hearth and listen to the singing of the kettle. “The oracles often give victory to our choice, and not to the order alone of the mundane periods. As, for instance, when they say that our voluntary sorrows germinate in us as the growth of the particular life we lead.” The reform which you talk about can be undertaken any morning before unbarring our doors. We need not call any convention. When two neighbors begin to eat corn bread who before ate wheat, then the gods smile from ear to ear, for it is very pleasant to them. Why do you not try it? Don’t let me hinder you.</p>
			<p>There are theoretical reformers at all times, and all the world over, living on anticipation. Wolff, travelling in the deserts of Bukhara, says, “Another party of dervishes came to me and observed, ‘The time will come when there shall be no difference between rich and poor, between high and low, when property will be in common, even wives and children.’ ” But forever I ask of such: What then? The dervishes in the deserts of Bukhara and the reformers in Marlboro’ Chapel sing the same song. “There’s a good time coming, boys,” but, asked one of the audience, in good faith, “Can you fix the date?” Said I, “Will you help it along?”</p>
			<p>The nonchalance and <i xml:lang="it">dolce-far-niente</i> air of nature and society hint at infinite periods in the progress of mankind. The States have leisure to laugh from Maine to Texas at some newspaper joke, and New England shakes at the double-entendres of Australian circles, while the poor reformer cannot get a hearing.</p>
			<p>Men do not fail commonly for want of knowledge, but for want of prudence to give wisdom the preference. What we need to know in any case is very simple. It is but too easy to establish another durable and harmonious routine. Immediately all parts of nature consent to it. Only make something to take the place of something, and men will behave as if it was the very thing they wanted. They <em>must</em> behave, at any rate, and will work up any material. There is always a present and extant life, be it better or worse, which all combine to uphold. We should be slow to mend, my friends, as slow to require mending, “Not hurling, according to the oracle, a transcendent foot towards piety.” The language of excitement is at best picturesque merely. You must be calm before you can utter oracles. What was the excitement of the Delphic priestess compared with the calm wisdom of Socrates?⁠—or whoever it was that was wise.⁠—Enthusiasm is a supernatural serenity.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Men find that action is another thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than what they in discoursing papers read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world’s affairs require in managing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More arts than those wherein you clerks proceed.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>As in geology, so in social institutions, we may discover the causes of all past change in the present invariable order of society. The greatest appreciable physical revolutions are the work of the light-footed air, the stealthy-paced water, and the subterranean fire. Aristotle said, “As time never fails, and the universe is eternal, neither the Tanais nor the Nile can have flowed forever.” We are independent of the change we detect. The longer the lever the less perceptible its motion. It is the slowest pulsation which is the most vital. The hero then will know how to wait, as well as to make haste. All good abides with him who waiteth <em>wisely</em>; we shall sooner overtake the dawn by remaining here than by hurrying over the hills of the west. Be assured that every man’s success is in proportion to his <em>average</em> ability. The meadow flowers spring and bloom where the waters annually deposit their slime, not where they reach in some freshet only. A man is not his hope, nor his despair, nor yet his past deed. We know not yet what we have done, still less what we are doing. Wait till evening, and other parts of our day’s work will shine than we had thought at noon, and we shall discover the real purport of our toil. As when the farmer has reached the end of the furrow and looks back, he can tell best where the pressed earth shines most.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>To one who habitually endeavors to contemplate the true state of things, the political state can hardly be said to have any existence whatever. It is unreal, incredible, and insignificant to him, and for him to endeavor to extract the truth from such lean material is like making sugar from linen rags, when sugarcane may be had. Generally speaking, the political news, whether domestic or foreign, might be written today for the next ten years, with sufficient accuracy. Most revolutions in society have not power to interest, still less alarm us; but tell me that our rivers are drying up, or the genus pine dying out in the country, and I might attend. Most events recorded in history are more remarkable than important, like eclipses of the sun and moon, by which all are attracted, but whose effects no one takes the trouble to calculate.</p>
			<p>But will the government never be so well administered, inquired one, that we private men shall hear nothing about it? “The king answered: At all events, I require a prudent and able man, who is capable of managing the state affairs of my kingdom. The ex-minister said: The criterion, O Sire! of a wise and competent man is, that he will not meddle with suchlike matters.” Alas that the ex-minister should have been so nearly right!</p>
			<p>In my short experience of human life, the <em>outward</em> obstacles, if there were any such, have not been living men, but the institutions of the dead. It is grateful to make one’s way through this latest generation as through dewy grass. Men are as innocent as the morning to the unsuspicious.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>And round about good morrows fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if day taught humanity.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Not being Reve of this Shire,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>The early pilgrim blithe he hailed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That o’er the hills did stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many an early husbandman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he met on the way;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>thieves and robbers all, nevertheless. I have not so surely foreseen that any Cossack or Chippewa would come to disturb the honest and simple commonwealth, as that some monster institution would at length embrace and crush its free members in its scaly folds; for it is not to be forgotten, that while the law holds fast the thief and murderer, it lets itself go loose. When I have not paid the tax which the State demanded for that protection which I did not want, itself has robbed me; when I have asserted the liberty it presumed to declare, itself has imprisoned me. Poor creature! if it knows no better I will not blame it. If it cannot live but by these means, I can. I do not wish, it happens, to be associated with Massachusetts, either in holding slaves or in conquering Mexico. I am a little better than herself in these respects.⁠—As for Massachusetts, that huge she Briareus, Argus and Colchian Dragon conjoined, set to watch the Heifer of the Constitution and the Golden Fleece, we would not warrant our respect for her, like some compositions, to preserve its qualities through all weathers.⁠—Thus it has happened, that not the Arch Fiend himself has been in my way, but these toils which tradition says were originally spun to obstruct him. They are cobwebs and trifling obstacles in an earnest man’s path, it is true, and at length one even becomes attached to his unswept and undusted garret. I love man⁠—kind<!-- em-dash in original -->, but I hate the institutions of the dead un-kind. Men execute nothing so faithfully as the wills of the dead, to the last codicil and letter. <em>They</em> rule this world, and the living are but their executors. Such foundation too have our lectures and our sermons, commonly. They are all <em>Dudleian;</em> and piety derives its origin still from that exploit of <i xml:lang="la">pius Æneas</i>, who bore his father, Anchises, on his shoulders from the ruins of Troy. Or rather, like some Indian tribes, we bear about with us the mouldering relics of our ancestors on our shoulders. If, for instance, a man asserts the value of individual liberty over the merely political commonweal, his neighbor still tolerates him, that he who is <em>living near</em> him, sometimes even sustains him, but never the State. Its officer, as a living man, may have human virtues and a thought in his brain, but as the tool of an institution, a jailer or constable it may be, he is not a whit superior to his prison key or his staff. Herein is the tragedy: that men doing outrage to their proper natures, even those called wise and good, lend themselves to perform the office of inferior and brutal ones. Hence come war and slavery in; and what else may not come in by this opening? But certainly there are modes by which a man may put bread into his mouth which will not prejudice him as a companion and neighbor.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Now turn again, turn again, said the pindèr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a wrong way you have gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For you have forsaken the king’s highway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a path over the corn.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">Undoubtedly, countless reforms are called for, because society is not animated, or instinct enough with life, but in the condition of some snakes which I have seen in early spring, with alternate portions of their bodies torpid and flexible, so that they could wriggle neither way. All men are partially buried in the grave of custom, and of some we see only the crown of the head above ground. Better are the physically dead, for they more lively rot. Even virtue is no longer such if it be stagnant. A man’s life should be constantly as fresh as this river. It should be the same channel, but a new water every instant.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Virtues as rivers pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still remains that virtuous man there was.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Most men have no inclination, no rapids, no cascades, but marshes, and alligators, and miasma instead. We read that when in the expedition of Alexander, Onesicritus was sent forward to meet certain of the Indian sect of Gymnosophists, and he had told them of those new philosophers of the West, Pythagoras, Socrates, and Diogenes, and their doctrines, one of them named Dandamis answered, that “They appeared to him to have been men of genius, but to have lived with too passive a regard for the laws.” The philosophers of the West are liable to this rebuke still. “They say that Lieou-hia-hoei, and Chao-lien did not sustain to the end their resolutions, and that they dishonored their character. Their language was in harmony with reason and justice; while their acts were in harmony with the sentiments of men.”</p>
			<p>Chateaubriand said: “There are two things which grow stronger in the breast of man, in proportion as he advances in years: the love of country and religion. Let them be never so much forgotten in youth, they sooner or later present themselves to us arrayed in all their charms, and excite in the recesses of our hearts an attachment justly due to their beauty.” It may be so. But even this infirmity of noble minds marks the gradual decay of youthful hope and faith. It is the allowed infidelity of age. There is a saying of the Wolofs, “He who was born first has the greatest number of old clothes,” consequently <abbr>M.</abbr> Chateaubriand has more old clothes than I have. It is comparatively a faint and reflected beauty that is admired, not an essential and intrinsic one. It is because the old are weak, feel their mortality, and think that they have measured the strength of man. They will not boast; they will be frank and humble. Well, let them have the few poor comforts they can keep. Humility is still a very human virtue. They look back on life, and so see not into the future. The prospect of the young is forward and unbounded, mingling the future with the present. In the declining day the thoughts make haste to rest in darkness, and hardly look forward to the ensuing morning. The thoughts of the old prepare for night and slumber. The same hopes and prospects are not for him who stands upon the rosy mountain-tops of life, and him who expects the setting of his earthly day.</p>
			<p>I must conclude that Conscience, if that be the name of it, was not given us for no purpose, or for a hinderance. However flattering order and expediency may look, it is but the repose of a lethargy, and we will choose rather to be awake, though it be stormy, and maintain ourselves on this earth and in this life, as we may, without signing our death-warrant. Let us see if we cannot stay here, where He has put us, on his own conditions. Does not his law reach as far as his light? The expedients of the nations clash with one another, only the absolutely right is expedient for all.</p>
			<p>There are some passages in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Antigone</i> of Sophocles, well known to scholars, of which I am reminded in this connection. Antigone has resolved to sprinkle sand on the dead body of her brother Polynices, notwithstanding the edict of King Creon condemning to death that one who should perform this service, which the Greeks deemed so important, for the enemy of his country; but Ismene, who is of a less resolute and noble spirit, declines taking part with her sister in this work, and says⁠—</p>
			<table epub:type="drama">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td>I, therefore, asking those under the earth to consider me, that I am compelled to do thus, will obey those who are placed in office; for to do extreme things is not wise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td>I would not ask you, nor would you, if you still wished, do it joyfully with me. Be such as seems good to you. But I will bury him. It is glorious for me doing this to die. I beloved will lie with him beloved, having, like a criminal, done what is holy; since the time is longer which it is necessary for me to please those below, than those here, for there I shall always lie. But if it seems good to you, hold in dishonor things which are honored by the gods.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td>I indeed do not hold them in dishonor; but to act in opposition to the citizens I am by nature unable.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Antigone being at length brought before King Creon, he asks⁠—</p>
			<table epub:type="drama">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td>Did you then dare to transgress these laws?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td>For it was not Zeus who proclaimed these to me, nor Justice who dwells with the gods below; it was not they who established these laws among men. Nor did I think that your proclamations were so strong, as, being a mortal, to be able to transcend the unwritten and immovable laws of the gods. For not something now and yesterday, but forever these live, and no one knows from what time they appeared. I was not about to pay the penalty of violating these to the gods, fearing the presumption of any man. For I well knew that I should die, and why not? even if you had not proclaimed it.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>This was concerning the burial of a dead body.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The wisest conservatism is that of the Hindus. “Immemorial custom is transcendent law,” says Manu. That is, it was the custom of the gods before men used it. The fault of our New England custom is that it is memorial. What is morality but immemorial custom? Conscience is the chief of conservatives. “Perform the settled functions,” says Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita; “action is preferable to inaction. The journey of thy mortal frame may not succeed from inaction.”⁠—“A man’s own calling with all its faults, ought not to be forsaken. Every undertaking is involved in its faults as the fire in its smoke.”⁠—“The man who is acquainted with the whole, should not drive those from their works who are slow of comprehension, and less experienced than himself.”⁠—“Wherefore, O Arjuna, resolve to fight,” is the advice of the God to the irresolute soldier who fears to slay his best friends. It is a sublime conservatism; as wide as the world, and as unwearied as time; preserving the universe with Asiatic anxiety, in that state in which it appeared to their minds. These philosophers dwell on the inevitability and unchangeableness of laws, on the power of temperament and constitution, the three <i xml:lang="sa">guṇas</i> or qualities, and the circumstances of birth and affinity. The end is an immense consolation; eternal absorption in Brahma. Their speculations never venture beyond their own tablelands, though they are high and vast as they. Buoyancy, freedom, flexibility, variety, possibility, which also are qualities of the Unnamed, they deal not with. The undeserved reward is to be earned by an everlasting moral drudgery; the incalculable promise of the morrow is, as it were, weighed. And who will say that their conservatism has not been effectual? “Assuredly,” says a French translator, speaking of the antiquity and durability of the Chinese and Indian nations, and of the wisdom of their legislators, “there are there some vestiges of the eternal laws which govern the world.”</p>
			<p>Christianity, on the other hand, is humane, practical, and, in a large sense, radical. So many years and ages of the gods those Eastern sages sat contemplating Brahma, uttering in silence the mystic “Om,” being absorbed into the essence of the Supreme Being, never going out of themselves, but subsiding farther and deeper within; so infinitely wise, yet infinitely stagnant; until, at last, in that same Asia, but in the western part of it, appeared a youth, wholly unforetold by them⁠—not being absorbed into Brahma, but bringing Brahma down to earth and to mankind; in whom Brahma had awaked from his long sleep, and exerted himself, and the day began⁠—a new avatar. The Brahman had never thought to be a brother of mankind as well as a child of God. Christ is the prince of Reformers and Radicals. Many expressions in the New Testament come naturally to the lips of all Protestants, and it furnishes the most pregnant and practical texts. There is no harmless dreaming, no wise speculation in it, but everywhere a substratum of good sense. It never <em>reflects</em>, but it <em>repents</em>. There is no poetry in it, we may say nothing regarded in the light of beauty merely, but moral truth is its object. All mortals are convicted by its conscience.</p>
			<p>The New Testament is remarkable for its pure morality; the best of the Hindo Scripture, for its pure intellectuality. The reader is nowhere raised into and sustained in a higher, purer, or <em>rarer</em> region of thought than in the Bhagavad Gita. Warren Hastings, in his sensible letter recommending the translation of this book to the Chairman of the East India Company, declares the original to be “of a sublimity of conception, reasoning, and diction almost unequalled,” and that the writings of the Indian philosophers “will survive when the British dominion in India shall have long ceased to exist, and when the sources which it once yielded of wealth and power are lost to remembrance.” It is unquestionably one of the noblest and most sacred scriptures which have come down to us. Books are to be distinguished by the grandeur of their topics, even more than by the manner in which they are treated. The Oriental philosophy approaches, easily, loftier themes than the modern aspires to; and no wonder if it sometimes prattle about them. <em>It</em> only assigns their due rank respectively to Action and Contemplation, or rather does full justice to the latter. Western philosophers have not conceived of the significance of Contemplation in their sense. Speaking of the spiritual discipline to which the Brahmans subjected themselves, and the wonderful power of abstraction to which they attained, instances of which had come under his notice, Hastings says:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>To those who have never been accustomed to the separation of the mind from the notices of the senses, it may not be easy to conceive by what means such a power is to be attained; since even the most studious men of our hemisphere will find it difficult so to restrain their attention, but that it will wander to some object of present sense or recollection; and even the buzzing of a fly will sometimes have the power to disturb it. But if we are told that there have been men who were successively, for ages past, in the daily habit of abstracted contemplation, begun in the earliest period of youth, and continued in many to the maturity of age, each adding some portion of knowledge to the store accumulated by his predecessors; it is not assuming too much to conclude, that as the mind ever gathers strength, like the body, by exercise, so in such an exercise it may in each have acquired the faculty to which they aspired, and that their collective studies may have led them to the discovery of new tracts and combinations of sentiment, totally different from the doctrines with which the learned of other nations are acquainted; doctrines which, however speculative and subtle, still as they possess the advantage of being derived from a source so free from every adventitious mixture, may be equally founded in truth with the most simple of our own.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">“The forsaking of works” was taught by Krishna to the most ancient of men, and handed down from age to age,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>until at length, in the course of time, the mighty art was lost.</p>
				<p>“In wisdom is to be found every work without exception,” says Krishna.</p>
				<p>“Although thou wert the greatest of all offenders, thou shalt be able to cross the gulf of sin with the bark of wisdom.”</p>
				<p>“There is not anything in this world to be compared with wisdom for purity.”</p>
				<p>“The action stands at a distance inferior to the application of wisdom.”</p>
				<p>The wisdom of a Muni “is confirmed, when, like the tortoise, he can draw in all his members, and restrain them from their wonted purposes.”</p>
				<p>“Children only, and not the learned, speak of the speculative and the practical doctrines as two. They are but one. For both obtain the selfsame end, and the place which is gained by the followers of the one is gained by the followers of the other.”</p>
				<p>“The man enjoyeth not freedom from action, from the non-commencement of that which he hath to do; nor doth he obtain happiness from a total inactivity. No one ever resteth a moment inactive. Every man is involuntarily urged to act by those principles which are inherent in his nature. The man who restraineth his active faculties, and sitteth down with his mind attentive to the objects of his senses, is called one of an astrayed soul, and the practicer of deceit. So the man is praised, who, having subdued all his passions, performeth with his active faculties all the functions of life, unconcerned about the event.”</p>
				<p>“Let the motive be in the deed and not in the event. Be not one whose motive for action is the hope of reward. Let not thy life be spent in inaction.”</p>
				<p>“For the man who doeth that which he hath to do, without affection, obtaineth the Supreme.”</p>
				<p>“He who may behold, as it were inaction in action, and action in inaction, is wise amongst mankind. He is a perfect performer of all duty.”</p>
				<p>“Wise men call him a <i xml:lang="sa">Pandit</i>, whose every undertaking is free from the idea of desire, and whose actions are consumed by the fire of wisdom. He abandoneth the desire of a reward of his actions; he is always contented and independent; and although he may be engaged in a work, he, as it were, doeth nothing.”</p>
				<p>“He is both a Yogi and a Sannyasi who performeth that which he hath to do independent of the fruit thereof; not he who liveth without the sacrificial fire and without action.”</p>
				<p>“He who enjoyeth but the Amrita which is left of his offerings, obtaineth the eternal spirit of Brahma, the Supreme.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">What, after all, does the practicalness of life amount to? The things immediate to be done are very trivial. I could postpone them all to hear this locust sing. The most glorious fact in my experience is not anything that I have done or may hope to do, but a transient thought, or vision, or dream, which I have had. I would give all the wealth of the world, and all the deeds of all the heroes, for one true vision. But how can I communicate with the gods who am a pencil-maker on the earth, and not be insane?</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“I am the same to all mankind,” says Krishna; “there is not one who is worthy of my love or hatred.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">This teaching is not practical in the sense in which the New Testament is. It is not always sound sense in practice. The Brahman never proposes courageously to assault evil, but patiently to starve it out. His active faculties are paralyzed by the idea of caste, of impassable limits, of destiny and the tyranny of time. Krishna’s argument, it must be allowed, is defective. No sufficient reason is given why Arjuna should fight. Arjuna may be convinced, but the reader is not, for his judgment is <em>not</em> “formed upon the speculative doctrines of the <i xml:lang="sa">Samkhya Shastra</i>.” “Seek an asylum in wisdom alone”; but what is wisdom to a Western mind? The duty of which he speaks is an arbitrary one. When was it established? The Brahman’s virtue consists in doing, not right, but arbitrary things. What is that which a man “hath to do”? What is “action”? What are the “settled functions”? What is “a man’s own religion,” which is so much better than another’s? What is “a man’s own particular calling”? What are the duties which are appointed by one’s birth? It is a defence of the institution of castes, of what is called the “natural duty” of the Kshatriya, or soldier, “to attach himself to the discipline,” “not to flee from the field,” and the like. But they who are unconcerned about the consequences of their actions are not therefore unconcerned about their actions.</p>
			<p>Behold the difference between the Oriental and the Occidental. The former has nothing to do in this world; the latter is full of activity. The one looks in the sun till his eyes are put out; the other follows him prone in his westward course. There is such a thing as caste, even in the West, but it is comparatively faint; it is conservatism here. It says, forsake not your calling, outrage no institution, use no violence, rend no bonds; the State is thy parent. Its virtue or manhood is wholly filial. There is a struggle between the Oriental and Occidental in every nation; some who would be forever contemplating the sun, and some who are hastening toward the sunset. The former class says to the latter, When you have reached the sunset, you will be no nearer to the sun. To which the latter replies, But we so prolong the day. The former “walketh but in that night, when all things go to rest the night of <em>time</em>. The contemplative Muni sleepeth but in the day of <em>time</em>, when all things wake.”</p>
			<p>To conclude these extracts, I can say, in the words of Sanjaya, “As, O mighty Prince! I recollect again and again this holy and wonderful dialogue of Krishna and Arjuna, I continue more and more to rejoice; and as I recall to my memory the more than miraculous form of Hari, my astonishment is great, and I marvel and rejoice again and again! Wherever Krishna the God of devotion may be, wherever Arjuna the mighty bowman may be, there too, without doubt, are fortune, riches, victory, and good conduct. This is my firm belief.”</p>
			<p>I would say to the readers of Scriptures, if they wish for a good book, read the Bhagavad Gita, an episode to the Mahabharata, said to have been written by Krishna Dvaipāyana Vyasa⁠—known to have been written by ⸻, more than four thousand years ago⁠—it matters not whether three or four, or when⁠—translated by Charles Wilkins. It deserves to be read with reverence even by Yankees, as a part of the sacred writings of a devout people; and the intelligent Hebrew will rejoice to find in it a moral grandeur and sublimity akin to those of his own Scriptures.</p>
			<p>To an American reader who, by the advantage of his position, can see over that strip of Atlantic coast to Asia and the Pacific, who, as it were, sees the shore slope upward over the Alps to the Himalaya Mountains, the comparatively recent literature of Europe often appears partial and clannish, and, notwithstanding the limited range of his own sympathies and studies, the European writer who presumes that he is speaking for the world, is perceived by him to speak only for that corner of it which he inhabits. One of the rarest of England’s scholars and critics, in his classification of the worthies of the world, betrays the narrowness of his European culture and the exclusiveness of his reading. None of her children has done justice to the poets and philosophers of Persia or of India. They have even been better known to her merchant scholars than to her poets and thinkers by profession. You may look in vain through English poetry for a single memorable verse inspired by these themes. Nor is Germany to be excepted, though her philological industry is indirectly serving the cause of philosophy and poetry. Even Goethe wanted that universality of genius which could have appreciated the philosophy of India, if he had more nearly approached it. His genius was more practical, dwelling much more in the regions of the understanding, and was less native to contemplation than the genius of those sages. It is remarkable that Homer and a few Hebrews are the most Oriental names which modern Europe, whose literature has taken its rise since the decline of the Persian, has admitted into her list of Worthies, and perhaps the <em>worthiest</em> of mankind, and the fathers of modern thinking⁠—for the contemplations of those Indian sages have influenced, and still influence, the intellectual development of mankind⁠—whose works even yet survive in wonderful completeness, are, for the most part, not recognized as ever having existed. If the lions had been the painters it would have been otherwise. In everyone’s youthful dreams philosophy is still vaguely but inseparably, and with singular truth, associated with the East, nor do after years discover its local habitation in the Western world. In comparison with the philosophers of the East, we may say that modern Europe has yet given birth to none. Beside the vast and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita, even our Shakespeare seems sometimes youthfully green and practical merely. Some of these sublime sentences, as the Chaldaean oracles of Zoroaster, still surviving after a thousand revolutions and translations, alone make us doubt if the poetic form and dress are not transitory, and not essential to the most effective and enduring expression of thought. <i xml:lang="la">Ex oriente lux</i> may still be the motto of scholars, for the Western world has not yet derived from the East all the light which it is destined to receive thence.</p>
			<p>It would be worthy of the age to print together the collected Scriptures or Sacred Writings of the several nations, the Chinese, the Hindus, the Persians, the Hebrews, and others, as the Scripture of mankind. The New Testament is still, perhaps, too much on the lips and in the hearts of men to be called a Scripture in this sense. Such a juxtaposition and comparison might help to liberalize the faith of men. This is a work which Time will surely edit, reserved to crown the labors of the printing-press. This would be the Bible, or Book of Books, which let the missionaries carry to the uttermost parts of the earth.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>While engaged in these reflections, thinking ourselves the only navigators of these waters, suddenly a canal-boat, with its sail set, glided round a point before us, like some huge river beast, and changed the scene in an instant; and then another and another glided into sight, and we found ourselves in the current of commerce once more. So we threw our rinds in the water for the fishes to nibble, and added our breath to the life of living men. Little did we think, in the distant garden in which we had planted the seed and reared this fruit, where it would be eaten. Our melons lay at home on the sandy bottom of the Merrimack, and our potatoes in the sun and water at the bottom of the boat looked like a fruit of the country. Soon, however, we were delivered from this fleet of junks, and possessed the river in solitude, once more rowing steadily upward through the noon, between the territories of Nashua on the one hand, and Hudson, once Nottingham, on the other. From time to time we scared up a kingfisher or a summer duck, the former flying rather by vigorous impulses than by steady and patient steering with that short rudder of his, sounding his rattle along the fluvial street.</p>
			<p>Erelong another scow hove in sight, creeping down the river; and hailing it, we attached ourselves to its side, and floated back in company, chatting with the boatmen, and obtaining a draught of cooler water from their jug. They appeared to be green hands from far among the hills, who had taken this means to get to the seaboard, and see the world; and would possibly visit the Falkland Isles and the China seas before they again saw the waters of the Merrimack, or perchance they would not return this way forever. They had already embarked the private interests of the landsman in the larger venture of the race, and were ready to mess with mankind, reserving only the till of a chest to themselves. But they too were soon lost behind a point, and we went croaking on our way alone. What grievance has its root among the New Hampshire hills? we asked; what is wanting to human life here, that these men should make such haste to the antipodes? We prayed that their bright anticipations might not be rudely disappointed.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Though all the fates should prove unkind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave not your native land behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ship, becalmed, at length stands still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steed must rest beneath the hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But swiftly still our fortunes pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find us out in every place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The vessel, though her masts be firm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her copper bears a worm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the cape, across the line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till fields of ice her course confine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It matters not how smooth the breeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shallow or how deep the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether she bears Manilla twine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in her hold Madeira wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or China teas, or Spanish hides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In port or quarantine she rides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from New England’s blustering shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New England’s worm her hulk shall bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sink her in the Indian seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twine, wine, and hides, and China teas.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">We passed a small desert here on the east bank, between Tyngsborough and Hudson, which was interesting and even refreshing to our eyes in the midst of the almost universal greenness. This sand was indeed somewhat impressive and beautiful to us. A very old inhabitant, who was at work in a field on the Nashua side, told us that he remembered when corn and grain grew there, and it was a cultivated field. But at length the fishermen, for this was a fishing place, pulled up the bushes on the shore, for greater convenience in hauling their seines, and when the bank was thus broken, the wind began to blow up the sand from the shore, until at length it had covered about fifteen acres several feet deep. We saw near the river, where the sand was blown off down to some ancient surface, the foundation of an Indian wigwam exposed, a perfect circle of burnt stones, four or five feet in diameter, mingled with fine charcoal, and the bones of small animals which had been preserved in the sand. The surrounding sand was sprinkled with other burnt stones on which their fires had been built, as well as with flakes of arrowhead stone, and we found one perfect arrowhead. In one place we noticed where an Indian had sat to manufacture arrowheads out of quartz, and the sand was sprinkled with a quart of small glass-like chips about as big as a fourpence, which he had broken off in his work. Here, then, the Indians must have fished before the whites arrived. There was another similar sandy tract about half a mile above this.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Still the noon prevailed, and we turned the prow aside to bathe, and recline ourselves under some buttonwoods by a ledge of rocks, in a retired pasture sloping to the water’s edge and skirted with pines and hazels, in the town of Hudson. Still had India, and that old noontide philosophy, the better part of our thoughts.</p>
			<p>It is always singular, but encouraging, to meet with common sense in very old books, as the Hitopadesha of Vishnu Sharma; a playful wisdom which has eyes behind as well as before, and oversees itself. It asserts their health and independence of the experience of later times. This pledge of sanity cannot be spared in a book, that it sometimes pleasantly reflect upon itself. The story and fabulous portion of this book winds loosely from sentence to sentence as so many oases in a desert, and is as indistinct as a camel’s track between Murzuk and Darfur. It is a comment on the flow and freshet of modern books. The reader leaps from sentence to sentence, as from one stepping-stone to another, while the stream of the story rushes past unregarded. The Bhagavad Gita is less sententious and poetic, perhaps, but still more wonderfully sustained and developed. Its sanity and sublimity have impressed the minds even of soldiers and merchants. It is the characteristic of great poems that they will yield of their sense in due proportion to the hasty and the deliberate reader. To the practical they will be common sense, and to the wise wisdom; as either the traveller may wet his lips, or an army may fill its water-casks at a full stream.</p>
			<p>One of the most attractive of those ancient books that I have met with is the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Laws of Manu</i>. According to Sir William Jones, “Vyasa, the son of Parashara, has decided that the Veda, with its Angas, or the six compositions deduced from it, the revealed system of medicine, the Puranas or sacred histories, and the code of Manu, were four works of supreme authority, which ought never to be shaken by arguments merely human.” The last is believed by the Hindus “to have been promulged in the beginning of time, by Manu, son or grandson of Brahma,” and “first of created beings”; and Brahma is said to have “taught his laws to Manu in a hundred thousand verses, which Manu explained to the primitive world in the very words of the book now translated.” Others affirm that they have undergone successive abridgments for the convenience of mortals, “while the gods of the lower heaven and the band of celestial musicians are engaged in studying the primary code.”⁠—“A number of glosses or comments on Manu were composed by the Munis, or old philosophers, whose treatises, together with that before us, constitute the Dharmaśāstra, in a collective sense, or Body of Law.” Kulluka Bhatta was one of the more modern of these.</p>
			<p>Every sacred book, successively, has been accepted in the faith that it was to be the final resting-place of the sojourning soul; but after all, it was but a caravansary which supplied refreshment to the traveller, and directed him farther on his way to Isfahan or Baghdad. Thank God, no Hindu tyranny prevailed at the framing of the world, but we are freemen of the universe, and not sentenced to any caste.</p>
			<p>I know of no book which has come down to us with grander pretensions than this, and it is so impersonal and sincere that it is never offensive nor ridiculous. Compare the modes in which modern literature is advertised with the prospectus of this book, and think what a reading public it addresses, what criticism it expects. It seems to have been uttered from some eastern summit, with a sober morning prescience in the dawn of time, and you cannot read a sentence without being elevated as upon the tableland of the Ghats. It has such a rhythm as the winds of the desert, such a tide as the Ganges, and is as superior to criticism as the Himalaya Mountains. Its tone is of such unrelaxed fiber, that even at this late day, unworn by time, it wears the English and the Sanskrit dress indifferently; and its fixed sentences keep up their distant fires still, like the stars, by whose dissipated rays this lower world is illumined. The whole book by noble gestures and inclinations renders many words unnecessary. English sense has toiled, but Hindu wisdom never perspired. Though the sentences open as we read them, unexpensively, and at first almost unmeaningly, as the petals of a flower, they sometimes startle us with that rare kind of wisdom which could only have been learned from the most trivial experience; but it comes to us as refined as the porcelain earth which subsides to the bottom of the ocean. They are clean and dry as fossil truths, which have been exposed to the elements for thousands of years, so impersonally and scientifically true that they are the ornament of the parlor and the cabinet. Any <em>moral</em> philosophy is exceedingly rare. This of Manu addresses our privacy more than most. It is a more private and familiar, and, at the same time, a more public and universal word, than is spoken in parlor or pulpit nowadays. As our domestic fowls are said to have their original in the wild pheasant of India, so our domestic thoughts have their prototypes in the thoughts of her philosophers. We are dabbling in the very elements of our present conventional and actual life; as if it were the primeval conventicle where how to eat, and to drink, and to sleep, and maintain life with adequate dignity and sincerity, were the questions to be decided. It is later and more intimate with us even than the advice of our nearest friends. And yet it is true for the widest horizon, and read out of doors has relation to the dim mountain line, and is native and aboriginal there. Most books belong to the house and street only, and in the fields their leaves feel very thin. They are bare and obvious, and have no halo nor haze about them. Nature lies far and fair behind them all. But this, as it proceeds from, so it addresses, what is deepest and most abiding in man. It belongs to the noontide of the day, the midsummer of the year, and after the snows have melted, and the waters evaporated in the spring, still its truth speaks freshly to our experience. It helps the sun to shine, and his rays fall on its page to illustrate it. It spends the mornings and the evenings, and makes such an impression on us overnight as to awaken us before dawn, and its influence lingers around us like a fragrance late into the day. It conveys a new gloss to the meadows and the depths of the wood, and its spirit, like a more subtle ether, sweeps along with the prevailing winds of a country. The very locusts and crickets of a summer day are but later or earlier glosses on the Dharmaśāstra of the Hindus, a continuation of the sacred code. As we have said, there is an orientalism in the most restless pioneer, and the farthest west is but the farthest east. While we are reading these sentences, this fair modern world seems only a reprint of the Laws of Manu with the gloss of Kulluka. Tried by a New England eye, or the mere practical wisdom of modern times, they are the oracles of a race already in its dotage, but held up to the sky, which is the only impartial and incorruptible ordeal, they are of a piece with its depth and serenity, and I am assured that they will have a place and significance as long as there is a sky to test them by.</p>
			<p>Give me a sentence which no intelligence can understand. There must be a kind of life and palpitation to it, and under its words a kind of blood must circulate forever. It is wonderful that this sound should have come down to us from so far, when the voice of man can be heard so little way, and we are not now within earshot of any contemporary. The woodcutters have here felled an ancient pine forest, and brought to light to these distant hills a fair lake in the southwest; and now in an instant it is distinctly shown to these woods as if its image had travelled hither from eternity. Perhaps these old stumps upon the knoll remember when anciently this lake gleamed in the horizon. One wonders if the bare earth itself did not experience emotion at beholding again so fair a prospect. That fair water lies there in the sun thus revealed, so much the prouder and fairer because its beauty needed not to be seen. It seems yet lonely, sufficient to itself, and superior to observation.⁠—So are these old sentences like serene lakes in the southwest, at length revealed to us, which have so long been reflecting our own sky in their bosom.</p>
			<p>The great plain of India lies as in a cup between the Himalayas and the ocean on the north and south, and the Brahmaputra and Indus, on the east and west, wherein the primeval race was received. We will not dispute the story. We are pleased to read in the natural history of the country, of the “pine, larch, spruce, and silver fir,” which cover the southern face of the Himalaya range; of the “gooseberry, raspberry, strawberry,” which from an imminent temperate zone overlook the torrid plains. So did this active modern life have even then a foothold and lurking-place in the midst of the stateliness and contemplativeness of those Eastern plains. In another era the “lily of the valley, cowslip, dandelion,” were to work their way down into the plain, and bloom in a level zone of their own reaching round the earth. Already has the era of the temperate zone arrived, the era of the pine and the oak, for the palm and the banyan do not supply the wants of this age. The lichens on the summits of the rocks will perchance find their level erelong.</p>
			<p>As for the tenets of the Brahmans, we are not so much concerned to know what doctrines they held, as that they were held by any. We can tolerate all philosophies, Atomists, Pneumatologists, Atheists, Theists⁠—Plato, Aristotle, Leucippus, Democritus, Pythagoras, Zoroaster, and Confucius. It is the attitude of these men, more than any communication which they make, that attracts us. Between them and their commentators, it is true, there is an endless dispute. But if it comes to this, that you compare notes, then you are all wrong. As it is, each takes us up into the serene heavens, whither the smallest bubble rises as surely as the largest, and paints earth and sky for us. Any sincere thought is irresistible. The very austerity of the Brahmans is tempting to the devotional soul, as a more refined and nobler luxury. Wants so easily and gracefully satisfied seem like a more refined pleasure. Their conception of creation is peaceful as a dream. “When that power awakes, then has this world its full expansion; but when he slumbers with a tranquil spirit, then the whole system fades away.” In the very indistinctness of their theogony a sublime truth is implied. It hardly allows the reader to rest in any supreme first cause, but directly it hints at a supremer still which created the last, and the Creator is still behind increate.</p>
			<p>Nor will we disturb the antiquity of this Scripture; “From fire, from air, and from the sun,” it was “milked out.” One might as well investigate the chronology of light and heat. Let the sun shine. Manu understood this matter best, when he said, “Those best know the divisions of days and nights who understand that the day of Brahma, which endures to the end of a thousand such ages, [infinite ages, nevertheless, according to mortal reckoning,]<!-- Thoreau's brackets --> gives rise to virtuous exertions; and that his night endures as long as his day.” Indeed, the Muslim and Tartar dynasties are beyond all dating. Methinks I have lived under them myself. In every man’s brain is the Sanskrit. The Vedas and their Angas are not so ancient as serene contemplation. Why will we be imposed on by antiquity? Is the babe young? When I behold it, it seems more venerable than the oldest man; it is more ancient than Nestor or the Sibyls, and bears the wrinkles of father Saturn himself. And do we live but in the present? How broad a line is that? I sit now on a stump whose rings number centuries of growth. If I look around I see that the soil is composed of the remains of just such stumps, ancestors to this. The earth is covered with mould. I thrust this stick many aeons deep into its surface, and with my heel make a deeper furrow than the elements have ploughed here for a thousand years. If I listen, I hear the peep of frogs which is older than the slime of Egypt, and the distant drumming of a partridge on a log, as if it were the pulse-beat of the summer air. I raise my fairest and freshest flowers in the old mould. Why, what we would fain call new is not skin deep; the earth is not yet stained by it. It is not the fertile ground which we walk on, but the leaves which flutter over our heads. The newest is but the oldest made visible to our senses. When we dig up the soil from a thousand feet below the surface, we call it new, and the plants which spring from it; and when our vision pierces deeper into space, and detects a remoter star, we call that new also. The place where we sit is called Hudson⁠—once it was Nottingham⁠—once⁠—</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>We should read history as little critically as we consider the landscape, and be more interested by the atmospheric tints and various lights and shades which the intervening spaces create, than by its groundwork and composition. It is the morning now turned evening and seen in the west⁠—the same sun, but a new light and atmosphere. Its beauty is like the sunset; not a fresco painting on a wall, flat and bounded, but atmospheric and roving or free. In reality, history fluctuates as the face of the landscape from morning to evening. What is of moment is its hue and color. Time hides no treasures; we want not its <em>then</em>, but its <em>now</em>. We do not complain that the mountains in the horizon are blue and indistinct; they are the more like the heavens.</p>
			<p>Of what moment are facts that can be lost⁠—which need to be commemorated? The monument of death will outlast the memory of the dead. The pyramids do not tell the tale which was confided to them; the living fact commemorates itself. Why look in the dark for light? Strictly speaking, the historical societies have not recovered one fact from oblivion, but are themselves, instead of the fact, that is lost. The researcher is more memorable than the researched. The crowd stood admiring the mist and the dim outlines of the trees seen through it, when one of their number advanced to explore the phenomenon, and with fresh admiration all eyes were turned on his dimly retreating figure. It is astonishing with how little cooperation of the societies the past is remembered. Its story has indeed had another muse than has been assigned it. There is a good instance of the manner in which all history began, in Al-Waqidi’s Arabian Chronicle: “I was informed by <i>Ahmed Almatin Aljorhami</i>, who had it from <i>Rephâa Ebn Kais Alámiri</i>, who had it from <i>Saiph Ebn Fabalah Alchâtquarmi</i>, who had it from <i>Thabet Ebn Alkamah</i>, who said he was present at the action.” These fathers of history were not anxious to preserve, but to learn the fact; and hence it was not forgotten. Critical acumen is exerted in vain to uncover the past; the <em>past</em> cannot be <em>presented</em>; we cannot know what we are not. But one veil hangs over past, present, and future, and it is the province of the historian to find out, not what was, but what is. Where a battle has been fought, you will find nothing but the bones of men and beasts; where a battle is being fought, there are hearts beating. We will sit on a mound and muse, and not try to make these skeletons stand on their legs again. Does Nature remember, think you, that they <em>were</em> men, or not rather that they <em>are</em> bones?</p>
			<p>Ancient history has an air of antiquity. It should be more modern. It is written as if the spectator should be thinking of the backside of the picture on the wall, or as if the author expected that the dead would be his readers, and wished to detail to them their own experience. Men seem anxious to accomplish an orderly retreat through the centuries, earnestly rebuilding the works behind, as they are battered down by the encroachments of time; but while they loiter, they and their works both fall a prey to the arch enemy. History has neither the venerableness of antiquity, nor the freshness of the modern. It does as if it would go to the beginning of things, which natural history might with reason assume to do; but consider the Universal History, and then tell us⁠—when did burdock and plantain sprout first? It has been so written for the most part, that the times it describes are with remarkable propriety called <em>dark ages</em>. They are dark, as one has observed, because we are so in the dark about them. The sun rarely shines in history, what with the dust and confusion; and when we meet with any cheering fact which implies the presence of this luminary, we excerpt and modernize it. As when we read in the history of the Saxons that Edwin of Northumbria “caused stakes to be fixed in the highways where he had seen a clear spring,” and “brazen dishes were chained to them to refresh the weary sojourner, whose fatigues Edwin had himself experienced.” This is worth all Arthur’s twelve battles.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Through the shadow of the world we sweep into the younger day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Than fifty years of Europe better one New England ray!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">Biography, too, is liable to the same objection; it should be autobiography. Let us not, as the Germans advise, endeavor to go abroad and vex our bowels that we may be somebody else to explain him. If I am not I, who will be?</p>
			<p>But it is fit that the Past should be dark; though the darkness is not so much a quality of the past as of tradition. It is not a distance of time, but a distance of relation, which makes thus dusky its memorials. What is near to the heart of this generation is fair and bright still. Greece lies outspread fair and sunshiny in floods of light, for there is the sun and daylight in her literature and art. Homer does not allow us to forget that the sun shone⁠—nor Phidias, nor the Parthenon. Yet no era has been wholly dark, nor will we too hastily submit to the historian, and congratulate ourselves on a blaze of light. If we could pierce the obscurity of those remote years, we should find it light enough; only <em>there</em> is not our day. Some creatures are made to see in the dark. There has always been the same amount of light in the world. The new and missing stars, the comets and eclipses, do not affect the general illumination, for only our glasses appreciate them. The eyes of the oldest fossil remains, they tell us, indicate that the same laws of light prevailed then as now. Always the laws of light are the same, but the modes and degrees of seeing vary. The gods are partial to no era, but steadily shines their light in the heavens, while the eye of the beholder is turned to stone. There was but the sun and the eye from the first. The ages have not added a new ray to the one, nor altered a fiber of the other.</p>
			<p>If we will admit time into our thoughts at all, the mythologies, those vestiges of ancient poems, wrecks of poems, so to speak, the world’s inheritance, still reflecting some of their original splendor, like the fragments of clouds tinted by the rays of the departed sun; reaching into the latest summer day, and allying this hour to the morning of creation; as the poet sings:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Fragments of the lofty strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Float down the tide of years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As buoyant on the stormy main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A parted wreck appears.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>These are the materials and hints for a history of the rise and progress of the race; how, from the condition of ants, it arrived at the condition of men, and arts were gradually invented. Let a thousand surmises shed some light on this story. We will not be confined by historical, even geological periods which would allow us to doubt of a progress in human affairs. If we rise above this wisdom for the day, we shall expect that this morning of the race, in which it has been supplied with the simplest necessaries, with corn, and wine, and honey, and oil, and fire, and articulate speech, and agricultural and other arts, reared up by degrees from the condition of ants to men, will be succeeded by a day of equally progressive splendor; that, in the lapse of the divine periods, other divine agents and godlike men will assist to elevate the race as much above its present condition.</p>
			<p>But we do not know much about it.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Thus did one voyageur waking dream, while his companion slumbered on the bank. Suddenly a boatman’s horn was heard echoing from shore to shore, to give notice of his approach to the farmer’s wife with whom he was to take his dinner, though in that place only muskrats and kingfishers seemed to hear. The current of our reflections and our slumbers being thus disturbed, we weighed anchor once more.</p>
			<p>As we proceeded on our way in the afternoon, the western bank became lower, or receded farther from the channel in some places, leaving a few trees only to fringe the water’s edge; while the eastern rose abruptly here and there into wooded hills fifty or sixty feet high. The bass, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Tilia americana</i>, also called the lime or linden, which was a new tree to us, overhung the water with its broad and rounded leaf, interspersed with clusters of small hard berries now nearly ripe, and made an agreeable shade for us sailors. The inner bark of this genus is the bast, the material of the fisherman’s matting, and the ropes and peasant’s shoes of which the Russians make so much use, and also of nets and a coarse cloth in some places. According to poets, this was once Philyra, one of the Oceanides. The ancients are said to have used its bark for the roofs of cottages, for baskets, and for a kind of paper called Philyra. They also made bucklers of its wood, “on account of its flexibility, lightness, and resiliency.” It was once much used for carving, and is still in demand for sounding-boards of pianofortes and panels of carriages, and for various uses for which toughness and flexibility are required. Baskets and cradles are made of the twigs. Its sap affords sugar, and the honey made from its flowers is said to be preferred to any other. Its leaves are in some countries given to cattle, a kind of chocolate has been made of its fruit, a medicine has been prepared from an infusion of its flowers, and finally, the charcoal made of its wood is greatly valued for gunpowder.</p>
			<p>The sight of this tree reminded us that we had reached a strange land to us. As we sailed under this canopy of leaves we saw the sky through its chinks, and, as it were, the meaning and idea of the tree stamped in a thousand hieroglyphics on the heavens. The universe is so aptly fitted to our organization that the eye wanders and reposes at the same time. On every side there is something to soothe and refresh this sense. Look up at the treetops and see how finely Nature finishes off her work there. See how the pines spire without end higher and higher, and make a graceful fringe to the earth. And who shall count the finer cobwebs that soar and float away from their utmost tops, and the myriad insects that dodge between them. Leaves are of more various forms than the alphabets of all languages put together; of the oaks alone there are hardly two alike, and each expresses its own character.</p>
			<p>In all her products Nature only develops her simplest germs. One would say that it was no great stretch of invention to create birds. The hawk, which now takes his flight over the top of the wood, was at first, perchance, only a leaf which fluttered in its aisles. From rustling leaves she came in the course of ages to the loftier flight and clear carol of the bird.</p>
			<p>Salmon Brook comes in from the west under the railroad, a mile and a half below the village of Nashua. We rowed up far enough into the meadows which border it to learn its piscatorial history from a haymaker on its banks. He told us that the silver eel was formerly abundant here, and pointed to some sunken creels at its mouth. This man’s memory and imagination were fertile in fishermen’s tales of floating isles in bottomless ponds, and of lakes mysteriously stocked with fishes, and would have kept us till nightfall to listen, but we could not afford to loiter in this roadstead, and so stood out to our sea again. Though we never trod in those meadows, but only touched their margin with our hands, we still retain a pleasant memory of them.</p>
			<p>Salmon Brook, whose name is said to be a translation from the Indian, was a favorite haunt of the aborigines. Here, too, the first white settlers of Nashua planted, and some dents in the earth where their houses stood and the wrecks of ancient apple-trees are still visible. About one mile up this stream stood the house of old John Lovewell, who was an ensign in the army of Oliver Cromwell, and the father of “famous Captain Lovewell.” He settled here before 1690, and died about 1754, at the age of one hundred and twenty years. He is thought to have been engaged in the famous Narragansett swamp fight, which took place in 1675, before he came here. The Indians are said to have spared him in succeeding wars on account of his kindness to them. Even in 1700 he was so old and gray-headed that his scalp was worth nothing, since the French Governor offered no bounty for such. I have stood in the dent of his cellar on the bank of the brook, and talked there with one whose grandfather had, whose father might have, talked with Lovewell. Here also he had a mill in his old age, and kept a small store. He was remembered by some who were recently living, as a hale old man who drove the boys out of his orchard with his cane. Consider the triumphs of the mortal man, and what poor trophies it would have to show, to wit:⁠—He cobbled shoes without glasses at a hundred, and cut a handsome swath at a hundred and five! Lovewell’s house is said to have been the first which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dustan reached on her escape from the Indians. Here probably the hero of Pequawket was born and bred. Close by may be seen the cellar and the gravestone of Joseph Hassell, who, as is elsewhere recorded, with his wife Anna, and son Benjamin, and Mary Marks, “were slain by our Indian enemies on September 2nd, [1691,]<!-- brackets Thoreau's --> in the evening.” As Gookin observed on a previous occasion, “The Indian rod upon the English backs had not yet done God’s errand.” Salmon Brook near its mouth is still a solitary stream, meandering through woods and meadows, while the then uninhabited mouth of the Nashua now resounds with the din of a manufacturing town.</p>
			<p>A stream from Otternic Pond in Hudson comes in just above Salmon Brook, on the opposite side. There was a good view of Uncannunuc, the most conspicuous mountain in these parts, from the bank here, seen rising over the west end of the bridge above. We soon after passed the village of Nashua, on the river of the same name, where there is a covered bridge over the Merrimack. The Nashua, which is one of the largest tributaries, flows from Wachusett Mountain, through Lancaster, Groton, and other towns, where it has formed well-known elm-shaded meadows, but near its mouth it is obstructed by falls and factories, and did not tempt us to explore it.</p>
			<p>Far away from here, in Lancaster, with another companion, I have crossed the broad valley of the Nashua, over which we had so long looked westward from the Concord hills without seeing it to the blue mountains in the horizon. So many streams, so many meadows and woods and quiet dwellings of men had lain concealed between us and those Delectable Mountains;⁠—from yonder hill on the road to Tyngsborough you may get a good view of them. There where it seemed uninterrupted forest to our youthful eyes, between two neighboring pines in the horizon, lay the valley of the Nashua, and this very stream was even then winding at its bottom, and then, as now, it was here silently mingling its waters with the Merrimack. The clouds which floated over its meadows and were born there, seen far in the west, gilded by the rays of the setting sun, had adorned a thousand evening skies for us. But as it were, by a turf wall this valley was concealed, and in our journey to those hills it was first gradually revealed to us. Summer and winter our eyes had rested on the dim outline of the mountains, to which distance and indistinctness lent a grandeur not their own, so that they served to interpret all the allusions of poets and travellers. Standing on the Concord Cliffs we thus spoke our mind to them:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>With frontier strength ye stand your ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With grand content ye circle round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tumultuous silence for all sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye distant nursery of rills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monadnock and the Peterborough Hills;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm argument that never stirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outcircling the philosophers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like some vast fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sailing through rain and sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through winter’s cold and summer’s heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still holding on upon your high emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ye find a shore amid the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not skulking close to land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cargo contraband,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they who sent a venture out by ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have set the Sun to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their honesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ships of the line, each one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye westward run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convoying clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which cluster in your shrouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always before the gale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a press of sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With weight of metal all untold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I seem to feel ye in my firm seat here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immeasurable depth of hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breadth of beam, and length of running gear</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Methinks ye take luxurious pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In your novel western leisure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So cool your brows and freshly blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Time had naught for ye to do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ye lie at your length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unappropriated strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhewn primeval timber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For knees so stiff, for masts so limber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stock of which new earths are made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One day to be our <em>western</em> trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit for the stanchions of a world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which through the seas of space is hurled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While we enjoy a lingering ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye still o’ertop the western day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reposing yonder on God’s croft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like solid stacks of hay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bold a line as ne’er was writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On any page by human wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The forest glows as if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An enemy’s campfires shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the horizon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the day’s funeral pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lighted there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Edged with silver and with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clouds hang o’er in damask fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with such depth of amber light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The west is dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where still a few rays slant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even Heaven seems extravagant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watatic Hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies on the horizon’s sill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a child’s toy left overnight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other duds to left and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the earth’s edge, mountains and trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand as they were on air graven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as the vessels in a haven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Await the morning breeze.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fancy even</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through your defiles windeth the way to heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yonder still, in spite of history’s page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Linger the golden and the silver age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the laboring gale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The news of future centuries is brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of new dynasties of thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From your remotest vale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But special I remember thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wachusett, who like me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Standest alone without society.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy far blue eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A remnant of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen through the clearing or the gorge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from the windows of the forge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth leaven all it passes by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing is true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stands ’tween me and you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou western pioneer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who know’st not shame nor fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By venturous spirit driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the eaves of heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And canst expand thee there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe enough of air?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even beyond the West</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou migratest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into unclouded tracts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a pilgrim’s axe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleaving thy road on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy well-tempered brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mak’st thyself a clearing in the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upholding heaven, holding down earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy pastime from thy birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not steadied by the one, nor leaning on the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I approve myself thy worthy brother!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">At length, like Rasselas and other inhabitants of happy valleys, we had resolved to scale the blue wall which bounded the western horizon, though not without misgivings that thereafter no visible fairyland would exist for us. But it would be long to tell of our adventures, and we have no time this afternoon, transporting ourselves in imagination up this hazy Nashua valley, to go over again that pilgrimage. We have since made many similar excursions to the principal mountains of New England and New York, and even far in the wilderness, and have passed a night on the summit of many of them. And now, when we look again westward from our native hills, Wachusett and Monadnock have retreated once more among the blue and fabulous mountains in the horizon, though our eyes rest on the very rocks on both of them, where we have pitched our tent for a night, and boiled our hasty-pudding amid the clouds.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>As late as 1724 there was no house on the north side of the Nashua, but only scattered wigwams and grisly forests between this frontier and Canada. In September of that year, two men who were engaged in making turpentine on that side, for such were the first enterprises in the wilderness, were taken captive and carried to Canada by a party of thirty Indians. Ten of the inhabitants of Dunstable, going to look for them, found the hoops of their barrel cut, and the turpentine spread on the ground. I have been told by an inhabitant of Tyngsborough, who had the story from his ancestors, that one of these captives, when the Indians were about to upset his barrel of turpentine, seized a pine knot and flourishing it, swore so resolutely that he would kill the first who touched it, that they refrained, and when at length he returned from Canada he found it still standing. Perhaps there was more than one barrel. However this may have been, the scouts knew by marks on the trees, made with coal mixed with grease, that the men were not killed, but taken prisoners. One of the company, named Farwell, perceiving that the turpentine had not done spreading, concluded that the Indians had been gone but a short time, and they accordingly went in instant pursuit. Contrary to the advice of Farwell, following directly on their trail up the Merrimack, they fell into an ambuscade near Thornton’s Ferry, in the present town of Merrimack, and nine were killed, only one, Farwell, escaping after a vigorous pursuit. The men of Dunstable went out and picked up their bodies, and carried them all down to Dunstable and buried them. It is almost word for word as in the Robin Hood ballad:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>They carried these foresters into fair Nottingham,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As many there did know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They digged them graves in their churchyard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they buried them all a-row.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Nottingham is only the other side of the river, and they were not exactly all a-row. You may read in the churchyard at Dunstable, under the “Memento Mori,” and the name of one of them, how they “departed this life,” and</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>This man with seven more that lies in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>this grave was slew all in a day by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Indians.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The stones of some others of the company stand around the common grave with their separate inscriptions. Eight were buried here, but nine were killed, according to the best authorities.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Gentle river, gentle river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo, thy streams are stained with gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a brave and noble captain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Floats along thy willowed shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All beside thy limpid waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All beside thy sands so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Indian</em> Chiefs and Christian warriors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joined in fierce and mortal fight.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<!-- "Indian" is Thoreau's modification of the original poem, which reads "Moorish" in its place -->
			<p class="new">It is related in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Dunstable</i>, that on the return of Farwell the Indians were engaged by a fresh party which they compelled to retreat, and pursued as far as the Nashua, where they fought across the stream at its mouth. After the departure of the Indians, the figure of an Indian’s head was found carved by them on a large tree by the shore, which circumstance has given its name to this part of the village of Nashville⁠—the “Indian Head.” “It was observed by some judicious,” says Gookin, referring to Philip’s war, “that at the beginning of the war the English soldiers made a nothing of the Indians, and many spake words to this effect: that one Englishman was sufficient to chase ten Indians; many reckoned it was no other but <i xml:lang="la">Veni, vidi, vici.</i>” But we may conclude that the judicious would by this time have made a different observation.</p>
			<p>Farwell appears to have been the only one who had studied his profession, and understood the business of hunting Indians. He lived to fight another day, for the next year he was Lovewell’s lieutenant at Pequawket, but that time, as we have related, he left his bones in the wilderness. His name still reminds us of twilight days and forest scouts on Indian trails, with an uneasy scalp;⁠—an indispensable hero to New England. As the more recent poet of Lovewell’s fight has sung, halting a little but bravely still:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Then did the crimson streams that flowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem like the waters of the brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That brightly shine, that loudly dash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far down the cliffs of Agiochook.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">These battles sound incredible to us. I think that posterity will doubt if such things ever were; if our bold ancestors who settled this land were not struggling rather with the forest shadows, and not with a copper-colored race of men. They were vapors, fever and ague of the unsettled woods. Now, only a few arrowheads are turned up by the plough. In the Pelasgic, the Etruscan, or the British story, there is nothing so shadowy and unreal.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It is a wild and antiquated looking graveyard, overgrown with bushes, on the highroad, about a quarter of a mile from and overlooking the Merrimack, with a deserted mill-stream bounding it on one side, where lie the earthly remains of the ancient inhabitants of Dunstable. We passed it three or four miles below here. You may read there the names of Lovewell, Farwell, and many others whose families were distinguished in Indian warfare. We noticed there two large masses of granite more than a foot thick and rudely squared, lying flat on the ground over the remains of the first pastor and his wife.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It is remarkable that the dead lie everywhere under stones⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>“Strata jacent passim <em>suo</em> quæque sub” <em>lapide</em>⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><i xml:lang="la">corpora</i>, we might say, if the measure allowed. When the stone is a slight one, it does not oppress the spirits of the traveller to meditate by it; but these did seem a little heathenish to us; and so are all large monuments over men’s bodies, from the pyramids down. A monument should at least be “star-y-pointing,” to indicate whither the spirit is gone, and not prostrate, like the body it has deserted. There have been some nations who could do nothing but construct tombs, and these are the only traces which they have left. They are the heathen. But why these stones, so upright and emphatic, like exclamation-points? What was there so remarkable that lived? Why should the monument be so much more enduring than the fame which it is designed to perpetuate⁠—a stone to a bone? “Here lies,”⁠—“Here lies”;⁠—why do they not sometimes write: There rises? Is it a monument to the body only that is intended? “Having reached the term of his <em>natural</em> life”;⁠—would it not be truer to say: Having reached the term of his <em>unnatural</em> life? The rarest quality in an epitaph is truth. If any character is given, it should be as severely true as the decision of the three judges below, and not the partial testimony of friends. Friends and contemporaries should supply only the name and date, and leave it to posterity to write the epitaph.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Here lies an honest man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rear-Admiral Van.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Faith, then ye have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two in one grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in his favor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here too lies the Engraver.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Fame itself is but an epitaph; as late, as false, as true. But they only are the true epitaphs which Old Mortality retouches.</p>
			<p>A man might well pray that he may not taboo or curse any portion of nature by being buried in it. For the most part, the best man’s spirit makes a fearful sprite to haunt his grave, and it is therefore much to the credit of Little John, the famous follower of Robin Hood, and reflecting favorably on his character, that his grave was “long celebrous for the yielding of excellent whetstones.” I confess that I have but little love for such collections as they have at the Catacombs, Père la Chaise, Mount Auburn, and even this Dunstable graveyard. At any rate, nothing but great antiquity can make graveyards interesting to me. I have no friends there. It may be that I am not competent to write the poetry of the grave. The farmer who has skimmed his farm might perchance leave his body to Nature to be ploughed in, and in some measure restore its fertility. We should not retard but forward her economies.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Soon the village of Nashua was out of sight, and the woods were gained again, and we rowed slowly on before sunset, looking for a solitary place in which to spend the night. A few evening clouds began to be reflected in the water and the surface was dimpled only here and there by a muskrat crossing the stream. We camped at length near Penichook Brook, on the confines of what is now Nashville, by a deep ravine, under the skirts of a pine wood, where the dead pine-leaves were our carpet, and their tawny boughs stretched overhead. But fire and smoke soon tamed the scene; the rocks consented to be our walls, and the pines our roof. A woodside was already the fittest locality for us.</p>
			<p>The wilderness is near as well as dear to every man. Even the oldest villages are indebted to the border of wild wood which surrounds them, more than to the gardens of men. There is something indescribably inspiriting and beautiful in the aspect of the forest skirting and occasionally jutting into the midst of new towns, which, like the sand-heaps of fresh fox-burrows, have sprung up in their midst. The very uprightness of the pines and maples asserts the ancient rectitude and vigor of nature. Our lives need the relief of such a background, where the pine flourishes and the jay still screams.</p>
			<p>We had found a safe harbor for our boat, and as the sun was setting carried up our furniture, and soon arranged our house upon the bank, and while the kettle steamed at the tent door, we chatted of distant friends and of the sights which we were to behold, and wondered which way the towns lay from us. Our cocoa was soon boiled, and supper set upon our chest, and we lengthened out this meal, like old voyageurs, with our talk. Meanwhile we spread the map on the ground, and read in the Gazetteer when the first settlers came here and got a township granted. Then, when supper was done and we had written the journal of our voyage, we wrapped our buffaloes about us and lay down with our heads pillowed on our arms listening awhile to the distant baying of a dog, or the murmurs of the river, or to the wind, which had not gone to rest:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>The western wind came lumbering in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing a faint Pacific din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our evening mail, swift at the call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of its Postmaster General;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laden with news from Californ’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er transpired hath since morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How wags the world by brier and brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hence to Athabasca Lake;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>or half awake and half asleep, dreaming of a star which glimmered through our cotton roof. Perhaps at midnight one was awakened by a cricket shrilly singing on his shoulder, or by a hunting spider in his eye, and was lulled asleep again by some streamlet purling its way along at the bottom of a wooded and rocky ravine in our neighborhood. It was pleasant to lie with our heads so low in the grass, and hear what a tinkling ever-busy laboratory it was. A thousand little artisans beat on their anvils all night long.</p>
			<p>Far in the night as we were falling asleep on the bank of the Merrimack, we heard some tyro beating a drum incessantly, in preparation for a country muster, as we learned, and we thought of the line⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>When the drum beat at dead of night.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>We could have assured him that his beat would be answered, and the forces be mustered. Fear not, thou drummer of the night, we too will be there. And still he drummed on in the silence and the dark. This stray sound from a far-off sphere came to our ears from time to time, far, sweet, and significant, and we listened with such an unprejudiced sense as if for the first time we heard at all. No doubt he was an insignificant drummer enough, but his music afforded us a prime and leisure hour, and we felt that we were in season wholly. These simple sounds related us to the stars. Ay, there was a logic in them so convincing that the combined sense of mankind could never make me doubt their conclusions. I stop my habitual thinking, as if the plough had suddenly run deeper in its furrow through the crust of the world. How can I go on, who have just stepped over such a bottomless skylight in the bog of my life. Suddenly old Time winked at me⁠—Ah, you know me, you rogue⁠—and news had come that <strong>it</strong> was well. That ancient universe is in such capital health, I think undoubtedly it will never die. Heal yourselves, doctors; by God, I live.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then idle Time ran gadding by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left me with Eternity alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear beyond the range of sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see beyond the verge of sight⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I see, smell, taste, hear, feel, that everlasting Something to which we are allied, at once our maker, our abode, our destiny, our very Selves; the one historic truth, the most remarkable fact which can become the distinct and uninvited subject of our thought, the actual glory of the universe; the only fact which a human being cannot avoid recognizing, or in some way forget or dispense with.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It doth expand my privacies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all, and leave me single in the crowd.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I have seen how the foundations of the world are laid, and I have not the least doubt that it will stand a good while.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Now chiefly is my natal hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only now my prime of life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not doubt the love untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which not my worth nor want hath bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which wooed me young and wooes me old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to this evening hath me brought.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">What are ears? what is Time? that this particular series of sounds called a strain of music, an invisible and fairy troop which never brushed the dew from any mead, can be wafted down through the centuries from Homer to me, and he have been conversant with that same aerial and mysterious charm which now so tingles my ears? What a fine communication from age to age, of the fairest and noblest thoughts, the aspirations of ancient men, even such as were never communicated by speech, is music! It is the flower of language, thought colored and curved, fluent and flexible, its crystal fountain tinged with the sun’s rays, and its purling ripples reflecting the grass and the clouds. A strain of music reminds me of a passage of the Vedas, and I associate with it the idea of infinite remoteness, as well as of beauty and serenity, for to the senses that is farthest from us which addresses the greatest depth within us. It teaches us again and again to trust the remotest and finest as the divinest instinct, and makes a dream our only real experience. We feel a sad cheer when we hear it, perchance because we that hear are not one with that which is heard.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Therefore a torrent of sadness deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the strains of thy triumph is heard to sweep.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The sadness is ours. The Indian poet Kālidās says in the Shakuntala: “Perhaps the sadness of men on seeing beautiful forms and hearing sweet music arises from some faint remembrance of past joys, and the traces of connections in a former state of existence.” As polishing expresses the vein in marble, and grain in wood, so music brings out what of heroic lurks anywhere. The hero is the sole patron of music. That harmony which exists naturally between the hero’s moods and the universe the soldier would fain imitate with drum and trumpet. When we are in health all sounds fife and drum for us; we hear the notes of music in the air, or catch its echoes dying away when we awake in the dawn. Marching is when the pulse of the hero beats in unison with the pulse of Nature, and he steps to the measure of the universe; then there is true courage and invincible strength.</p>
			<p>Plutarch says that “Plato thinks the gods never gave men music, the science of melody and harmony, for mere delectation or to tickle the ear; but that the discordant parts of the circulations and beauteous fabric of the soul, and that of it that roves about the body, and many times, for want of tune and air, breaks forth into many extravagances and excesses, might be sweetly recalled and artfully wound up to their former consent and agreement.”</p>
			<p>Music is the sound of the universal laws promulgated. It is the only assured tone. There are in it such strains as far surpass any man’s faith in the loftiness of his destiny. Things are to be learned which it will be worth the while to learn. Formerly I heard these</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>Rumors from an Aeolian Harp</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a vale which none hath seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where foot of man has never been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as here lives with toil and strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An anxious and a sinful life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There every virtue has its birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere it descends upon the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thither every deed returns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the generous bosom burns.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There love is warm, and youth is young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poetry is yet unsung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Virtue still adventures there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freely breathes her native air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ever, if you hearken well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You still may hear its vesper bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tread of high-souled men go by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their thoughts conversing with the sky.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">According to Iamblichus, “Pythagoras did not procure for himself a thing of this kind through instruments or the voice, but employing a certain ineffable divinity, and which it is difficult to apprehend, he extended his ears and fixed his intellect in the sublime symphonies of the world, he alone hearing and understanding, as it appears, the universal harmony and consonance of the spheres, and the stars that are moved through them, and which produce a fuller and more intense melody than anything effected by mortal sounds.”</p>
			<p>Travelling on foot very early one morning due east from here about twenty miles, from Caleb Harriman’s tavern in Hampstead toward Haverhill, when I reached the railroad in Plaistow, I heard at some distance a faint music in the air like an Aeolian harp, which I immediately suspected to proceed from the cord of the telegraph vibrating in the just awakening morning wind, and applying my ear to one of the posts I was convinced that it was so. It was the telegraph harp singing its message through the country, its message sent not by men, but by gods. Perchance, like the statue of Memnon, it resounds only in the morning, when the first rays of the sun fall on it. It was like the first lyre or shell heard on the seashore⁠—that vibrating cord high in the air over the shores of earth. So have all things their higher and their lower uses. I heard a fairer news than the journals ever print. It told of things worthy to hear, and worthy of the electric fluid to carry the news of, not of the price of cotton and flour, but it hinted at the price of the world itself and of things which are priceless, of absolute truth and beauty.</p>
			<p>Still the drum rolled on, and stirred our blood to fresh extravagance that night. The clarion sound and clang of corselet and buckler were heard from many a hamlet of the soul, and many a knight was arming for the fight behind the encamped stars.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Before each van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prick forth the aery knights, and couch their spears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thickest legions close; with feats of arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From either end of Heaven the welkin burns.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Away! away! away! away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye have not kept your secret well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will abide that other day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those other lands ye tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Has time no leisure left for these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The acts that ye rehearse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not eternity a lease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For better deeds than verse?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’T<!-- contraction split in original --> is sweet to hear of heroes dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know them still alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sweeter if we earn their bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in us they survive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our life should feed the springs of fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a perennial wave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ocean feeds the babbling founts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which find in it their grave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye skies drop gently round my breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be my corselet blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye earth receive my lance in rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My faithful charger you;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye stars my spearheads in the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My arrow-tips ye are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the routed foemen fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My bright spears fixed are.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Give me an angel for a foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fix now the place and time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straight to meet him I will go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the starry chime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with our clashing bucklers’ clang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavenly spheres shall ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While bright the northern lights shall hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside our tourneying.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if she lose her champion true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell Heaven not despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will be her champion new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fame I will repair.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="new">There was a high wind this night, which we afterwards learned had been still more violent elsewhere, and had done much injury to the cornfields far and near; but we only heard it sigh from time to time, as if it had no license to shake the foundations of our tent; the pines murmured, the water rippled, and the tent rocked a little, but we only laid our ears closer to the ground, while the blast swept on to alarm other men, and long before sunrise we were ready to pursue our voyage as usual.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
